KEP-1880 Multiple Service CIDRs (#3365)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/1880-services-ip-ranges/README.md

## Proposal

The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that uses 2 new API Objects: ServiceIPRange
and ServiceIP, and allow users to dynamically increase the number of Services IPs available by
creating new ServiceIPRanges.

The new allocator will be able to "automagically" consume IPs from any ServiceIPRange available, we can
think about this model, as the same as adding more disks to a Storage system to increase the
capacity.

To simplify the model, make it backwards compatible and to avoid that it can evolve into something
different and collide with other APIs, like Gateway APIs, we are adding the following constraints:

 - a ServiceIPRange will be immutable after creation (to be revisited before Beta).
 - a ServiceIPRange can only be deleted if there are no Service IP associated to it (enforce by finalizer)
 - there can be overlapping ServiceIPRanges.
 - the apiserver will periodically ensure that a "default" ServiceIPRange exists to cover the service CIDR flags
   and the "kubernetes.default" Service.
 - any ServiceIP existing in a cluster has to belong to a ServiceIPRange.

>  - any Service with a ClusterIP assigned is expected to have always a ServiceIP object associated.

Reviewer: Add
- a ServiceIPRange which is being deleted can not be used to allocate new IPs

#### The kube-apiserver bootstrap process and the service-cidr flags

Currently, the Service CIDRs are configured independently in each kube-apiserver using flags. During
the bootstrap process, the apiserver uses the first IP of each range to create the special
"kubernetes.default" service. It also starts a reconcile loop, that synchronize the state of the
bitmap with the assigned IPs to the Services.

With current implementation, that each kube-apiserver can boot with different ranges configured.
There is no conflict resolution, each apiserver keep writing and deleting others apiservers allocator bitmap
and Services.

In order to be completely backwards compatible, the bootstrap process will remain the same, the
difference is that instead of creating a bitmap based on the flags, it will create new
ServiceIPRange object from the flags (flags configuration removal is out of scope of this KEP) 

> with a special label `networking.kubernetes.io/service-ip-cidr-default` set to true.

Reviewer: minor: s/default/from-flags/ ?

With the new implementation only the Service IP Range configuration will be consistent, but not the
default IP Family, that will still depend on the flags configuration of each individual apiserver.
However, users still can provide consistency by using a webhook or admission controller for
defaulting the IPFamily or IPFamilyPolicy fields on Services (to be revisited before Beta).

> There can be multiple default ServiceIPRange objects, also for the same IP family, since

Author: yeah, this was assuming the previous name convention for the default range that will handle the conflict, I have to update it for the new way, using labels for the default ranges

apiservers with different configuration can work, the only condition is that the defined
service IP ranges contain the `kubernetes.default` Service.

The new bootstrap process will be:

```
read_flags
if invalid flags
  exit
get ServiceCIDR objects
if empty || no default
   create default ServiceCIDR from flags
   run
else
   if default matches flags
      run
   else if overlaps
      log/event
      run
   else

>       log/event periodically

Reviewer: So, to answer my own question above, you would NOT create N ranges, but instead complain that the default doesn;t match "my" flags?

This is racy, though - what happens when multiple API servers hit the "no default" condition - they will create their own range and then you have multiple different defaults.

I think it might be simpler and more obvious like:

```
at starup:
	read_flags
	if invalid flags
		exit
	run default-service-ip-range controller
	run apiserver

controller:
	watch all ServiceCIDR objects labelled from-flags
		ignore being-deleted ranges
	wait for first sync

controller on_event:
	if no default range matching exactly my flags
		log
		create a ServiceCIDR from my flags
			generateName: "default-" or "from-flags-"
			from-flags label: "true"
	else if multiple
		log
		if multiple ranges match exactly my flags
			sort them by creation time
			log
			delete all but one
		endif
	endif
	if kubernetes.default does not exist
		create it
```

This is a little different and means the `kubernetes.default` logic has to accept any assigned IP, even if it is not "my own".  Whichever apiserver gets there first wins.

What do you think?  Having this as a distinct controller seems nice and contained.

Author: > This is a little different and means the kubernetes.default logic has to accept any assigned IP, even if it is not "my own". Whichever apiserver gets there first wins.

yeah, but who keeps it consistent?

This topic is growing and I don't have still clear what do we want to offer, current implementation is super rigid, once something is created it keeps updating it in a loop. There is no conflict resolution and different configurations don't work, they just screw the cluster.

If we want to allow dynamic configuration of ranges, it seems legit that users can resize or replace the default range, but this opens a lot of new scenarios, super complicated ones when there are inconsistent configurations.

Maybe for alpha we don't allow different configurations for the flags

> What do you think? Having this as a distinct controller seems nice and contained.

yeah, right now is an infinity for loop :smile: , that sounds much better

      run
```

[![](https://mermaid.ink/img/pako:eNp1ksFuwjAMhl_Fygkk2AP0AFpbBpvEBbYLbQ9W40KkNKnStBuq-u4LLRXZpuUQRf4__7aTdCzXnFjAzgarC7zHqQK3npNQa5vBcrmCt5kh5FCTaUVOy1xwA4XEcz0fZNh3LUrBx9i6h1SNHnsng9JuH9YKTskLWpSZJ1-pHkzC2ZYsHMcS0Wt8qOcjNe7hjf1EYZ8-lBVyTPG1ySfqOBXYSAv0JWq77j2GjNFmoE5Ti5GfG3cl2vwyzeHXj31umxwalXnCMOMKNp1uyUisfiVv_kv25LvFzmvrZyj8G3pY7JLIPZEl_wIzr9yDvA0-Dc8WrCRTouDu-btbLGX2QiWlLHDH-0WmLFW9Q5uKuwobLqw2LChQ1rRg2Fh9vKqcBdY0NEGxQPebyjvVfwMtxq4y)](https://mermaid.live/edit#pako:eNp1ksFuwjAMhl_Fygkk2AP0AFpbBpvEBbYLbQ9W40KkNKnStBuq-u4LLRXZpuUQRf4__7aTdCzXnFjAzgarC7zHqQK3npNQa5vBcrmCt5kh5FCTaUVOy1xwA4XEcz0fZNh3LUrBx9i6h1SNHnsng9JuH9YKTskLWpSZJ1-pHkzC2ZYsHMcS0Wt8qOcjNe7hjf1EYZ8-lBVyTPG1ySfqOBXYSAv0JWq77j2GjNFmoE5Ti5GfG3cl2vwyzeHXj31umxwalXnCMOMKNp1uyUisfiVv_kv25LvFzmvrZyj8G3pY7JLIPZEl_wIzr9yDvA0-Dc8WrCRTouDu-btbLGX2QiWlLHDH-0WmLFW9Q5uKuwobLqw2LChQ1rRg2Fh9vKqcBdY0NEGxQPebyjvVfwMtxq4y)

#### The special "default" ServiceIPRanges

> There has to be always one default ServiceIPRange containing the `kubernetes.default` Service.

Reviewer: I think this statement is misleading.  How about something like:

The `kubernetes.default` Service is expected to be covered by a valid range.  Each apiserver will ensure that a range object exists to cover its own flag-defined ranges, so this should be true in normal cases.  If someone were to force-delete the range covering `kubernetes.default` it would be treated the same as any Service in the repair loop, which will generate warnings about orphaned Service IPs.

If the cluster is dual-stack, there has to be also one default ServiceIPRange per IP family.

In order to ensure the flags are covered by a range, the controller will handle the case of the
ServiceIPRange being deleted forcefully by recreating it. We allow overlapping ranges for this
reason, and the default ServiceIPRange is denoted by a wellknown label, not a special name.

> The controller will also handle the case where the well-known label is removed, re-adding it.

Reviewer: I thought I commented on this - I don't think we can re-add it if we don't KNOW this range was created by us, and the way we know is that label. So if the user removes that label, all we can do is make a new range.

cause an error on the Service creation. The allocator will also set the reference to the Service on the
IPAddress object.

The new allocator will have a local list with all the IP ranges and IP already allocated, so it will
have to check just for one free IP in any of these ranges and try to create the object.
There can be races with 2 allocators trying to allocate the same IP, but the storage guarantees the consistency
and the first will win, meanwhile the other will have to retry.

Another racy situation is when the allocator is full and an IPAddress is deleted but the allocator takes
some time to receive the notification. One solution can be to perform a List to obtain current state, but
it will be simpler to just fail to create the Service and ask the user to try to create the Service again.

If the apiserver crashes during a Service create operation, the IPAddress is allocated but the
Service is not created, the IPaddress will be orphan. To avoid leaks, a controller will use the
`metadata.creationTimestamp` field to detect orphan objects and delete them.

There is going to be a controller to avoid leaking resources:

> - checking that the corresponding parentReference on the IPAddress match the corresponding Service

Reviewer: Regarding UID - I spoke with @deads2k and he's OK to move UID init earlier, so if we need it, we can use it.

> - checking that the corresponding parentReference on the IPAddress match the corresponding Service

Author: > Now we have 2 IPs that seem valid - they both refer to "x", and "x" exists. As long as the IP GC controller verifies that `IP.ref = x" and "x.spec.clusterIPs[] includes that IP" I think we're OK without UID. Agree?

right, we have the information on both the service and the IP to avoid the need of UIDs,

> - checking that the corresponding parentReference on the IPAddress match the corresponding Service

Reviewer: Coming back to this - if we have UID, we can work with any parent (e.g. gateway)

> - checking that the corresponding parentReference on the IPAddress match the corresponding Service

Author: yep, UID solves it and it seems we have it covered https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/110646

For any Service and IPAddress that doesn't belong to a ServiceIPRange the controller will raise an event
informing the user, keeping the same behavior

```go
// cluster IP is out of range
c.recorder.Eventf(&svc, nil, v1.EventTypeWarning, "ClusterIPOutOfRange", "ClusterIPAllocation", "Cluster IP [%v]:%s is not within the service CIDR %s; please recreate service",
```

- Valid Service and ServiceIPRange but not IPAddress

It can happen that an user forcefully delete an IPAddress, in this case, the controller will regenerate the IPAddress.

> During this time, there is a chance that an apiserver tries to allocate this IPAddress, with a possible situation where

Reviewer: This is a problematic answer (and I know I helped make it :)

Keeping it in memory on the apiserver only works as long as the apiserver doesn't restart.  IOW, we can't *really* guarantee it, unless we keep YET ANOTHER object like the hidden bitmap.  I wrote up a lot and then realized this, so I will leave my comment here, but I don't think it is valid.

For Services we can fix it, but for opaque other thingds we can't.

Perhaps we should not try to "really" fix it.  You went behind our back and force-deleted an IP or your controller did not release the IP properly.  You get what you paid for.

------------------Probably garbage below----------------------

This is a place where UID might matter.  Consider this:

Create a Gateway (or something you don't really know about) that allocates an IP.  They set the ref to their own kind and name.  Someone deletes that IP.  apiserver sees the DELETE but the thing referenced still exists, so it leaves it marked as "terminating".  We can periodically re-check, but we are stuck like this forever.

What REALLY happened was:
* User created Gateway "foo"
* Gateway controller allocated IP and ref -> "foo"
* User deleted gateway "foo"
* gateway controller deletes the IP
* Race:
  - user creates a new Gateway "foo"
  - apiserver observes IP deletion

Or even worse:
* User created Gateway "foo"
* Gateway controller allocated IP and ref -> "foo"
* User deleted gateway "foo"
* gateway controller doesn't delete the IP (leave it for GC)
* user creates a new Gateway "foo"
* apiserver repair loop finds the IP with a valid ref to "foo"
  
If the new gateway is created before the apiserver observes the delete, apiserver will find that gateway "foo" still exists and can't release the IP.  It can't peek inside "foo" to see if that is the right IP because it is a type it does not know.  If it knew the UID it could see that "foo" UID was different and release the IP.

I see that we do not have a UID at BeginCreate.  That seems wrong to me.  Will ask api-machinery.

Author: > user creates a new Gateway "foo"
> apiserver repair loop finds the IP with a valid ref to "foo"

that newly created Gateway will have a new IP, the repair loop will find 2 IPs to the same Object and we are in the situation you've described here https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3365/files#r900423953

I think we've agreed to move the repair from the apiservers to a single controller on the controller manager.

Reviewer: UID fixes this :)

> I think we've agreed to move the repair from the apiservers to a single controller on the controller manager.

Maybe we should do that as a distinct step?

- only is possible to use reserved a range of Service IP addresses using the feature gate
  "keps/sig-network/3070-reserved-service-ip-range"
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/95570

### Goals

Implement a new allocation logic for Services IPs that:

- scales well with the number of reservations
- the number of allocation is tunable
- is completely backwards compatible

### Non-Goals

- Any change unrelated to Services
- Any generalization of the API model that can evolve onto something different, like an IPAM API, or
  collide with existing APIs like Ingress and GatewayAPI.
- NodePorts use the same allocation model than ClusterIPs, but it is totally out of scope of this
  KEP. However, this KEP can be a proof that a similar model will work for NodePorts too.
- Change the default IPFamily used for Services IP allocation, the defaulting depends on the
  services.spec.IPFamily and services.spec.IPFamilyPolicy, a simple webhook or an admission plugin
  can set this fields to the desired default, so the allocation logic doesn't have to handle it.
- Removing the apiserver flags that define the service IP CIDRs

## Proposal

> The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that uses 2 new API Objects: ServiceIPRange

Author: The flag in the apiserver is `--service-cluster-ip-range` 
With the `ClusterCIDRConfig` API it seems that ClusterCIDR will be related to the pod network.
I think that these IPs are always going to be related to Services ...

> The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that uses 2 new API Objects: ServiceIPRange

Author: `ServiceCIDR` sounds good

 - any ServiceIP existing in a cluster has to belong to a ServiceIPRange
 - any Service with a ClusterIP assigned has to have always a ServiceIP object associated

 This creates a 1to1 relation between Service and IPAddress, and a 1toN relation between 
 ServiceIPRange and IPAddress.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a Kubernetes user I want to be able to dynamically increase the number of IPs available for
Services.

#### Story 2

As a Kubernetes admin I want to have a process that allows me to renumber my Services IPs.

#### Story 3

As a Kubernetes developer I want to be able to know the current Service IP range and the IP
addresses allocated.

#### Story 4

As a Kubernetes admin that wants to use IPv6, I want to be able to follow the IPv6 address planning
best practices, being able to assign /64 prefixes to my end subnets.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Current API machinery doesn't consider transactions, Services API is kind of special in this regard
since already performs allocations inside the Registry pipeline using the Storage to keep
consistency on an Obscure API Object that stores the bitmap with the allocations.

> This proposal also requires to perform validation from one Object against other Object inside an API

Author: yes, this was befor we allowed overlapping in the IPRanges

	// a start and end unless there is an implicit end.
	Range string
	// A byte array representing the serialized state of a range allocation. Additional clarifiers on
	// the type or format of data should be represented with annotations. For IP allocations, this is
	// represented as a bit array starting at the base IP of the CIDR in Range, with each bit representing
	// a single allocated address (the fifth bit on CIDR 10.0.0.0/8 is 10.0.0.4).
	Data []byte
}
```

To avoid leaking resources, they also need to implement to repair loops that run in the
`controlplane` instance that keep the bitmaps in sync with the current Services allocated IPs.

The order of the IP families defined in the service-cluster-ip-range flag defines the primary IP family used by the allocator.
This default IP family is used in cases where a Service creation doesn't provide the necessary information, defaulting
the Service to Single Stack with an IP chosen from the default IP family defined.

The current implementation doesn't guarantee consistency for Service IP ranges and default IP families across
multiple apiservers.

### New allocation model

The new allocation mode requires:

> - 2 new API objects ServiceIPRange and IPAddress in a new subgroup services.networking.k8s.io, that will be protected

Author: I think we went down this rabbit hole with gateway API, networking.k8s.io doesn't have alpha fields now and has deprecated the beta, I can't remember the details, but IIRC gateway API ended in a new subgroup

> - 2 new API objects ServiceIPRange and IPAddress in a new subgroup services.networking.k8s.io, that will be protected

Author: ok, found it

https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-api-machinery/c/S0KuN_PJYXY/m/573BLOo4EAAJ

 so we are going to be the guineas pig to catch all thse new bugs :smile: love it

apiservers with different configuration can work, the only condition is that the defined
service IP ranges contain the `kubernetes.default` Service.

The new bootstrap process pseudocode will be:

```sh
parse --service-cluster-ip-range
if CIDR flags are set
	if a `default` range exists {
		read it
		if default != my flag values {
      # current behavior doesn't stop multiple apiservers to boot with different configurations
      # despite each one delete the services of the other
			inform user: log warning/generate event (periodically)
      use the `default` range configuration
		}
	} else { // no default range
		try to create it from my flag values
		if error {
			if error == already exists {
				// maybe racing with other apiserver
				read it
				if default != my flag values {
          # current behavior doesn't stop multiple apiservers to boot with different configurations
          # despite each one delete the services of the other
          inform user: log warning/generate event (periodically)
          use the `default` range configuration
				}
			} else {
				handle error
			}
		}
	}

> } else { // flags not set

Author: we can start paving the way, "no flags sets but apiserver is able to get a default IPRange it can boot"

> } else { // flags not set

Author: we can't get rids of flags because we can't boostrap, at least I can't see how

	if `default` range exists {
		read it
	} else { // no default range
		handle error
	}
}
```

#### The special "default" ServiceIPRanges

There has to be always one default ServiceIPRange containing the `kubernetes.default` Service.

> If the cluster is dual-stack, there has to be also one default ServiceIPRange per IP family.

Author: yeah, but I was thinking more about this on how users will use this and changed my mind
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3365#discussion_r895142302

It is not the same situation as in nodes, pods are distributed uniformly across nodes so it makes sense to have the same masks per node (though it can change https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/109814#issuecomment-1138898983)

For Services, you assign an IPv6 /64 and you don't need more ranges anymore, we are making clear we don't want semantics on the ranges, Service IPs are fungible, so the real problem is in IPv4

And we are going to allow overlapping that means we have to add logic to the allocators to merge ranges, from the UX and implementation perspective it seems easier to think about single ranges, that was Casey point since the beginning https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3365#discussion_r892787939

> If the cluster is dual-stack, there has to be also one default ServiceIPRange per IP family.

Reviewer: I updated comment there.  TL;DR - let's not block on this - add a beta criterion to revisit this and see if we are still happy?

In order to guarantee it, the controller that participate on the deletion of ServiceIPRange, will
handle the cases when the ServiceIPRange will be deleted forcefully recreating it, remember we allow
overlapping ranges and the default ServiceIPRange depend on the annotation, not the name.

> The controller will also handle the case where the annotation is removed, re-adding it.

Author: does managedFields help here? 
I can see some weird controller constantly deleting the label and we keep recreating it

> The controller will also handle the case where the annotation is removed, re-adding it.

Reviewer: that seems like a stretch - if it happens, we can discuss, but it's a pretty broken controller :)

#### Service IP Allocation

When a a new Service is going to be created and already has defined the ClusterIPs, the allocator will
just try to create the corresponding IPAddress objects, any error creating the IPAddress object will
cause an error on the Service creation.

The new allocator will have a local list with all the IP ranges and IP already allocated, so it will
have to check just for one free IP in any of these ranges and try to create the object.
There can be races with 2 allocators trying to allocate the same IP, but the storage guarantees the consistency
and the first will win, meanwhile the other will have to retry.

Another racy situation is when the allocator is full and an IPAddress is deleted but the allocator takes
some time to receive the notification. One solution can be to perform a List to obtain current state, but
it will be simpler to just fail to create the Service and ask the user to try to create the Service again.

Since the IP address allocation in the apiserver happens in the BeginCreate stage, we can not set
an owner reference when the IP is created. In order to avoid leaks, the allocator adds an annotation

> with the timestamp at it was created, because if the apiserver crashes during the operation, the

Author: TIL,

IPaddress will be orphan, but the controller doesn't have a way to know if it is really orphan or
just being part of a new Service created.

There is going to be a controller to avoid leaking resources:

> - adding the corresponding ownerReference on the IPAddress to the corresponding Service

Author: if we avoid uid we can also set it during allocation, that is a big win,  do we really need to care about uid? 
ClusterIPs are immutable

to reach one of the apiservers, its allocator will still consider the range valid and may allocate one IP
from there. To mititage this problem, we'll set a grace period of 60 seconds on the ServiceIPrange controller
to remove the finalizer, if an IP address is created during this time we'll be able to block the deletion
and inform the user.

For any Service and IPAddress that doesn't belong to a ServiceIPRange the controller will raise an event
informing the user, keeping the same behavior

```go
// cluster IP is out of range
c.recorder.Eventf(&svc, nil, v1.EventTypeWarning, "ClusterIPOutOfRange", "ClusterIPAllocation", "Cluster IP [%v]:%s is not within the service CIDR %s; please recreate service",
```

- Valid Service and ServiceIPRange but not IPAddress

It can happen that an user forcefully delete an IPAddress, in this case, the controller will regenerate the IPAddress.

During this time, there is a chance that an apiserver tries to allocate this IPAddress, with a possible situation where
2 Services has the same IPAddress. In order to avoid it, the Allocator will not delete an IP from its local cache

> until it verifies that the Service associated has been deleted too.

Reviewer: s/Service/consumer of that IP/ ?

- Valid IPAddress and ServiceIPRange but no Service

The IPAddress will be deleted and an event generated if the controller determines that the IPAddress
is orphan [(see Allocator section)](#Allocator)

#### Resizing Service IP Ranges

One of the most common problems users may have is how to scale up or scale down their service IP ranges.

Let's see an example on how these operations will be implemented.

Assume we have  configured a service range 10.0.0.0/24 and its fully used, we can:

1. Add another /24 range 10.0.1.0/24 and keep the previous one
2. Add an overlapping larger range 10.0.0.0/23

> The user can now remove the first /24 range, since the new range covers all the existing IP Addresses

Reviewer: In case 2 only...

The same applies for scaling down, meanwhile the new range contains all the existing IPAddresses, the old
range will be safely deleted.

However, there can be a race condition during the operation of scaling down, since the propagation of the
deletion can take some time, one allocator can successfully allocate an IP address out of new range (but still
inside of the old range).

There is one controller that will periodically check that 1on1 relation between IPAddresses and Services is
correct, and will start sending events to warn the user that it has to fix/recreate the corresponding Service.

#### API

```go
// ServiceIPRange defines a range of IPs using CIDR format (192.168.0.0/24 or 2001:db2::0/64).
type ServiceIPRange struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   ServiceIPRangeSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
}

// ServiceIPRangeSpec describe how the ServiceIPRange's specification looks like.
type ServiceIPRangeSpec struct {
	// CIDR is an IP block in CIDR notation "10.0.0.0/8" or "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"

>   // in using its canonical representation (rfc5952)

Reviewer: you say canonical but the example you give isnt' :)

I don't think it needs to  be canonical, though?

Author: if we move to single-stack what if we make this the name instead of a spec field, this will handle duplications

Reviewer: We can't make it the name because we need to allow overlaps in the defaults.  E.g. apiserver makes a default, user deletes it, apiserver makes a new default with the same range.

Author: then canonical seem superfluos

Reviewer: That was my argument :)

	CIDR string `json:"cidr"`
}

// IPAddress represents an IP used by Kubernetes associated to an ServiceIPRange.
// The name of the object is the IP address in canonical format.
type IPAddress struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   IPAddressSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressSpec describe the attributes in an IP Address,

> type IPAddressSpec struct {

Reviewer: I guess we need our own ref

Author: what about https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#multiple-resource-reference

```go
serviceRef:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    name: kubernetes
    namespace: default
```

I really love if we can set this reference during the allocation, in BeginCreate, it will simplify a lot of problems like detecting leaks, ...

Reviewer: I think here we need to use "resource" rather thsan "kind" because we don't know it, and the kind could be presented on multiple resources.  Sigh.

Author: I took the same one that Gateway uses, group and kind should be enough, no?
```
type ParentReference struct {
  // Group is the group of the referent.
  Group string
  // Kind is kind of the referent.
  Kind string
  // Namespace is the namespace of the referent
  Namespace string
  // Name is the name of the referent
  Name string
}
```

Reviewer: It can't be group/kind because we can't assert that the controller knows about the kinds, which is required to use "kind".  Gateway impls *do* know each kind, so it's OK.   Also, Gateway is a user-facing API, this is not, so it's not as ugly.

Author: Ic, it is well explained here https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#kind-vs-resource

resource it is

Author: also added UID

Cross validation of Objects is not common in the Kubernetes API, sig-apimachinery should verify not bad precedent is introduced.

Current Kubernetes cluster have a very static network configuration, exposing the Service IP range configuration will give
more flexibility to users, with the risk to have problematic or incongruent network configurations.

The Pod Network configuration is not really a Cluster configuration option, some CNI plugins use the node.Spec.ClusterCIDR field,
but that is not guaranteed to be used. There is an effort in keps/sig-network/2593-multiple-cluster-cidrs to expose this configuration,
but this also presents other cross-validation problem.

## Design Details

### API

Define two new API objects

#### IPRange

##### Type

```go
// IPRange defines a range of IPs using CIDR format (192.168.0.0/24 or 2001:db2::0/64).
type IPRange struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   IPRangeSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
	Status IPRangeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// IPRangeSpec describe how the IPRange's specification looks like.
type IPRangeSpec struct {
	// An IPv4 block in CIDR notation "10.0.0.0/8"

> 	IPv4 string `json:"ipv4"`

Author: I can't find the discussion in the multiple clusterCidr API KEP https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2594, but I made exactly the same point your are doing now, but changed my opinion.
Having different objects for IP family makes harder the reconciliation and validation, and you can always leave one empty for single stack

> 	IPv4 string `json:"ipv4"`

Author: based on this new feedback and the desire of resizing and scale up and down ranges I think we should go with single family https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3365#discussion_r895053758

To be realistic, once we remove the size limitation on IPv6 I don't think that people will need multiple ranges ono IPv6, a /64 is huge, the actual problem is with IPv4 and scale up or scale down service

> 	IPv4 string `json:"ipv4"`

Reviewer: The biggest arguments in favor of supporting both are:

1) Consistency with CCC
2) A single rnage object for apiserver default ranges
3) No race if the user ever changes the config by adding a new range

I don't want to block on this - can we add a beta criterion to revisit this and see if we are still happy?

> 	IPv4 string `json:"ipv4"`

Author: I'm renaming everything to be consistent with the multi-cluster-cidr KEP

	// An IPv6 block in CIDR notation "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"
	IPv6 string `json:"ipv6"`

  // Users may reserve the first number of IPs in each range to be not used for automatic allocation.
  ReservedSize int

  // Primary defines the primary IP family of the IP range (default to IPv4)

>   Primary enum(ipv4|ipv6)

Reviewer 2: Adding a "Primary family" here seems strange, even if we decide that ranges should be dual-family. Instead, that seems like an aspect of the allocator itself.

What if there are two ranges, and one has v4 primary and the other v6? What is the default action?

If this sort of live configuration is desired, then some kind of ServiceIPPolicy object might be a better fit.

Author: this is for backwards compatibility, we already have this notion of "primary" IPFamily, and the whole defaulting and policy logic is very complex.

The Primary only defines the defaulting, one service can only reference one IPRange, that is other reason why IPRange contains both families ...

Reviewer 2: That seems unnecessarily specific. Rather, Services could request a specific ServiceIPClass (to use the existing Kubernetes practices), with a certain ServiceIPClass being the default (same as Ingress or PVs or Runtimes).

Because if the cluster administrator wants to "silently" enable disjoint ranges for whatever reason, they should be able to do this without impacting users.

(Perhaps this needs to be broken out as a separate thread).

Author: > That seems unnecessarily specific. 

One of the use cases is to be able to switch the primary IPFamily, the API Service allocation logic depends on the primary IP family ... I still didn't work out all the details here, but this notion of primary IP family is something we should be able to handle ... let me write up the allocation logic, so I can refresh my memory and we can discuss there in more detail

> That seems unnecessarily specific. Rather, Services could request a specific ServiceIPClass (to use the existing Kubernetes practices), with a certain ServiceIPClass being the default (same as Ingress or PVs or Runtimes).

> Because if the cluster administrator wants to "silently" enable disjoint ranges for whatever reason, they should be able to do this without impacting users.
> (Perhaps this needs to be broken out as a separate thread).

Yes, this is an important topic, which model do we want to implement, a Class model or as @thockin mentioned yesterday in sig-network meeting, if I understood him correctly is, where IPs are fungible resources, and IPRanges are blocks of these resources, you just simple add more pools to add more IPs resources and the apiserver keeps consuming them.

Author: removed the primary field

}

// IPRangeStatus indicates if the IPRange is ready to be used for allocating IPs
// If not ready not IPAddress object can be 
// xref: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties
type IPRangeStatus struct {
  // Conditions holds an array of metav1.Condition that describe the state of the IPRange.

>   Conditions []metav1.Conditon

Author: The idea of using a Status field is to signal the allocators on the apiservers, so they can know when they can use the Range to allocate IP.

This will centralize the operations on IP ranges on the controller, and will allow use to control complex operations like cross validation on creation and handle the delete process, or just temporary make will range unavailable to perform operations like renumbering (moving services from one range to other) of services safely ...

>   Conditions []metav1.Conditon

Author: removed the status,

// If not ready not IPAddress object can be 
// xref: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties
type ServiceIPRangeStatus struct {
  // Conditions holds an array of metav1.Condition that describe the state of the ServiceIPRange.
  Conditions []metav1.Conditon
}

```

The ServiceIPRange will have the following operations:

- Create:
  
  - Validate fields
  - Set status to not ready, a controller should handle the status
  - Set a finalizer

- Update:

  - ServiceIPRangeSpec only will allow to a special operation to replace the "default" ServiceIPRange (see TBD)

- Delete:

  - The ServiceIPRange will have a finalizer to avoid leaking objects that depend on it.

The ServiceIPRange objects will be reconciled by a controller running in the kube-controller-manager
that will set the Status to ready so the new allocator can use it. It will perform the following
operations:

- cross validation, per example, avoiding overlapping IP Ranges
- participate on the deletion of a ServiceIPRange object, removing the finalizer, since a

>   ServiceIPRange can only be removed if there are no IP Addresses referencing it

Author: ```suggestion
  ServiceIPRange can only be removed if there are no IP Addresses referencing it.
  The default ServiceIPRange can not be deleted
```

  KEP. However, this KEP can be a proof that a similar model will work for NodePorts too.
- Change the default IPFamily used for Services IP allocation, the defaulting depends on the
  services.spec.IPFamily and services.spec.IPFamilyPolicy, a simple webhook or an admission plugin
  can set this fields to the desired default, so the allocation logic doesn't have to handle it.

## Proposal

The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that consumes 2 new API Objects: ServiceIPRange
and ServiceIP, and allow users to dynamically increase the number of Services IPs available by
creating new ServiceIPRanges.

The new allocator will be able to "automagically" consume IPs from any of this new ranges, we can
think about this model, as the same as adding more disks to a Storage system to increase the
capacity.

To simplify the model, make it backwards compatible and to avoid that it can evolve into something
different and collide with other APIs, like Gateway APIs, we are adding the following constraints:

 - a ServiceIPRange will be immutable after creation
 - a ServiceIPRange can only be deleted if there are no ServiceIP associated to it

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Author: my initial idea was implementing 2, that is why I've added an status field to IPrange, so we can indicate the allocators "stop using this range temporary because I'm going to do one operation on it" and we move the complexity to the singleton controller instead of having it per apiserver, avoiding races.

I wanted to start simple, I would love to do 2, but I think that it has to be implemented and documented as:
"When you create a new range that overlaps with an existing range, the controller will take it as a migration operation, 
1. If you have a 10.0.0.0/24 range and you create a new 10.0.0.0/16 range, the controller will understand that you want to scale up the range available, it will verify that the new range 10.0.0.0/16 is ready to be used, and set the status on 10.0.0.0/24 to unready, so the new range can be used"
Same for scale down.
WDYT?

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Author: so, the constraint will be true, just that the controller will convert it in an update

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Reviewer: I don't see why the staus lockout is needed - this is not really what status is for.

What does the controller need to do to make it "ready"?  What race are you concerned with?

Each API server has a set of ranges it knows about.  Only non-deleted ranges (no deletionTimestamp) are considered. Ranges might or might not overlap.  The allocator will pick based on a TBD heuristic, but no range in inherently "better" or "worse" than any other.

An allocated service IP implicitly "depends on" all ranges which include it.

The finalizer for a being-deleted range will only be cleared when no IPs depend _exclusively_ on that range.  IOW, after deletion, all IPs are still covered by at least 1 range (unless user action violates that, in which case we can't auto-repair it).  

One race to prevent:
* range X is 10.0.0.0/24
* 3 API servers
* user deletes X via API server 0, blocked by finalizer
* finalizer sees no IPs from X and finishes the deletion
* at the same time, a user creates a service via apiserver 2 
* API server 2 has not yet observed the deletion of X
* API server 2 allocates 10.0.0.42

To block that we either need to wait until all API servers observe the deletion (wall time or a finalizer per apiserver?) or we need to confirm the existence of a covering range on every IP allocation.

Can you think of other sequences of operations that would break?

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Author: > I don't see why the status lockout is needed - this is not really what status is for.

I was trying to avoid dealing with logic on the allocators to automatically handle overlaps, and put the load on the users, but since we are in full automation mode, I'll remove the status lockout ... we are basically building a routing table and the routes updates come from the API instead of a routing protocol :smile: 

> One race to prevent:

That race is the same scenario as if an user deletes an IPRange with existing IPs allocated, should we handle it differently? is just "bad luck"

> To block that we either need to wait until all API servers observe the deletion (wall time or a finalizer per apiserver?

 ... we can reduce the risk with a wall time, a finalizer per apiserver seems excessive to me, I have doubts that apimachinery folks will like we add that ... we can also document that deleting IPRanges is a disruptive operation and no Services should be created during that operation, with the risk of obtaining an IP that will no longer be valid (if the apiserver takes more than X seconds to see the IPRange delete)

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Reviewer: > That race is the same scenario as if an user deletes an IPRange with existing IPs allocated, should we handle it differently? is just "bad luck"

If the user overrides the finalizer and breaks the cluster, they earned it.

If we do it occasionally because of "bad luck", we should go to our rooms and think about what we have done.

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Author: > If we do it occasionally because of "bad luck", we should go to our rooms and think about what we have done.

haha, no, no no, I didn't mean that ... I mean, assuming we do random allocation from each range, is not possible to sync "deleting IPRange" and "create a new Service that allocates new IP", ( I think that two-phase commit or these kind of things solve it but :smile:)  .... so, if we assume that this race is always there, what I'm saying is:

"cluster-admin, bear in mind that when you are deleting an IPRange, there is a time to sync the allocators status, so try to not create Services during that operation, anyway, don't worry, because we'll wait some time to totally remove the range and if you had bad luck we'll warn you, generate an Event informing of the problem and we'll keep the IPRange until the problematic Service is deleted"

We can add an annotation to IPRanges to indicate allocators to not use, this will facilitate operators, the can set the annotation, disable the IPrange and then perform the deletion

>  - there can not be overlapping IP networks on the ServiceIPRanges created

Reviewer: I think the only simple answer is finalizers waiting, giving time for other apiservers to see it and stop allocating.

>  - there has to be always an unique and default ServiceIPRange

Author: Indeed, I saw that yesterday, but we have to keep the flags semantics for backwards compatibility and for bootstrapping,  we ALWAYS need a default IPRange , and remember that we have the special Service for the kube-apiserver.
I think that we can not not be very flexible here or we can screw the cluster bootstrap process

>  - there has to be always an unique and default ServiceIPRange

Reviewer: so even years from now, there will be flags which are used to bootstrap?  :(

>  - there has to be always an unique and default ServiceIPRange

Author: chicken and egg problem :upside_down_face:

addresses allocated.

#### Story 4

As a Kubernetes admin that wants to use IPv6, I want to be able to follow the IPv6 address planning
best practices, being able to assign /64 prefixes to my end subnets.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Current API machinery doesn't consider transactions, Services API is kind of special in this regard
since already performs allocations inside the Registry pipeline using the Storage to keep
consistency on an Obscure API Object that stores the bitmap with the allocations.

This proposal also requires to perform validation from one Object against other Object inside an API
request.

### Risks and Mitigations

Cross validation of Objects is not common in the Kubernetes API, sig-apimachinery should verify not
bad precedent is introduced.

Current Kubernetes cluster have a very static network configuration, allowing to expand the Service
IP ranges will give more flexibility to users, with the risk of having problematic or incongruent
network configurations with overlapping. But this is not really a new problem, users need to do a
proper network planning before adding new ranges to the Service IP pool.

> 

Author: added a paragraph, they consume the clusterIP field, unless they were doing some assumptions about the range, it should not be any problem.
If they were considering the range, it had to be a configuration parameter at cluster creation, since there is no way a component can obtain the service range parameters, they can now use the new IPRange object to obtain this information

## Design Details

### Current implementation details 

[Kubernetes
Services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.20/#service-v1-core) need
to be able to dynamically allocate resources from a predefined range/pool for ClusterIPs.

ClusterIP is the IP address of the service and is usually assigned randomly. If an address is
specified manually, is in-range, and is not in use, it will be allocated to the service; otherwise
creation of the service will fail. The Service ClusterIP range is defined in the kube-apiserver with
the following flags:

```
--service-cluster-ip-range string
A CIDR notation IP range from which to assign service cluster IPs. This must not overlap with any IP ranges assigned to nodes or pods. Max of two dual-stack CIDRs is allowed.
```

And in the controller-manager:

```
--service-cluster-ip-range string

> CIDR Range for Services in cluster. Requires --allocate-node-cidrs to be true

Author: the controller-manager only uses the service cluster ip range for the ipam controller, it just skip the service ranges from the node ranges to avoid overlapping between services and pods

// data encoding hints). A range allocation should *ALWAYS* be recreatable at any time by observation
// of the cluster, thus the object is less strongly typed than most.
type RangeAllocation struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta
	// A string representing a unique label for a range of resources, such as a CIDR "10.0.0.0/8" or
	// port range "10000-30000". Range is not strongly schema'd here. The Range is expected to define
	// a start and end unless there is an implicit end.
	Range string
	// A byte array representing the serialized state of a range allocation. Additional clarifiers on
	// the type or format of data should be represented with annotations. For IP allocations, this is
	// represented as a bit array starting at the base IP of the CIDR in Range, with each bit representing
	// a single allocated address (the fifth bit on CIDR 10.0.0.0/8 is 10.0.0.4).
	Data []byte
}
```

To avoid leaking resources, they also need to implement to repair loops that run in the
`controlplane` instance that keep the bitmaps in sync with the current Services allocated IPs.

> The order of the IP families defined in the service-cluster-ip-range flag defines the primary IP family used by the allocator.

Author: We always need the flags to bootstrap the cluster, someone has to create the initial IPRange
The default Service IPFamily depend on the flags, the allocator uses it when you create a service without enough information, but this can be easily changed with a webhook or an admission controller, setting the IPFamily, IPFamilyPolicy fields .... 
We already don't have consistency on configurations on multiple apiservers, with this new approach the service ranges will be consistent, but the default IP family will still be defined by the flag orders ... is it worth it to fix this?

> The order of the IP families defined in the service-cluster-ip-range flag defines the primary IP family used by the allocator.

Reviewer: It would be nice to say "eventually those flags can go away" even if it takes a couple years.

We can make that a followup KEP, I suppose - don't need to do it here.  Just be clear that this KEP does not remove the need for those flags

This default IP family is used in cases where a Service creation doesn't provide the necessary information, defaulting
the Service to Single Stack with an IP chosen from the default IP family defined.

### API

The new model will define two new API objects:

#### ServiceIPRange

```go
// ServiceIPRange defines a range of IPs using CIDR format (192.168.0.0/24 or 2001:db2::0/64).
type ServiceIPRange struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   ServiceIPRangeSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
	Status ServiceIPRangeStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// ServiceIPRangeSpec describe how the ServiceIPRange's specification looks like.
type ServiceIPRangeSpec struct {
	// An IPv4 block in CIDR notation "10.0.0.0/8"
	IPv4 string `json:"ipv4"`

> 	// An IPv6 block in CIDR notation "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"

Author: should we enforce for canonical representations? that seems to be easier to consume

> 	// An IPv6 block in CIDR notation "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"

Reviewer: I don't think we need to enforce canonical form, do we?  It is simpler, but anyone who is consuming these can/will do that anyway and this is not used for string-comparison.  I'm open either way

> 	// An IPv6 block in CIDR notation "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"

Author: we avoid duplicates, there are lots of ways to express the same range in IPv6,  "fd00:1:2:3::/64" is the same as "fd00:1:2:3:0:0:0::/64"

> 	// An IPv6 block in CIDR notation "fd12:3456:789a:1::/64"

Reviewer: This is in the spec, not the name, so duplicates are not caught automatically.  I can create 100 ranges all which use "fd00:1:2:3::/64" and it's valid, right?

	IPv6 string `json:"ipv6"`
}

// ServiceIPRangeStatus indicates if the ServiceIPRange is ready to be used for allocating IPs

> // If not ready not IPAddress object can be 

Author: copy paste thing

// xref: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties
type ServiceIPRangeStatus struct {
  // Conditions holds an array of metav1.Condition that describe the state of the ServiceIPRange.
  Conditions []metav1.Conditon
}

```

The ServiceIPRange will have the following operations:

- Create:
  
  - Validate fields

>   - Set status to not ready, a controller should handle the status

Author: nope

  - Set a finalizer

- Update:

  - ServiceIPRangeSpec only will allow to a special operation to replace the "default" ServiceIPRange (see TBD)

- Delete:

  - The ServiceIPRange will have a finalizer to avoid leaking objects that depend on it.

The ServiceIPRange objects will be reconciled by a controller running in the kube-controller-manager
that will set the Status to ready so the new allocator can use it. It will perform the following
operations:

- cross validation, per example, avoiding overlapping IP Ranges
- participate on the deletion of a ServiceIPRange object, removing the finalizer, since a
  ServiceIPRange can only be removed if there are no IP Addresses referencing it.

>   The default ServiceIPRange can not be deleted

Reviewer: How?  We don't yet have liens yet, and even if we did, those are overrideable.  If someone deletes the default range, even if we have a finalizer, that range is no longer valid.

We could document it as "this may be recreated periodically by the apiserver" and either just do it at startup or check it every 5 minutes or actively watch it.   But to recreate it, it would have to actually go away.  Consider this:

* apiserver creates default range for 10.0.0.0/24
* kubernetes.default gets 10.0.0.1
* user deletes the default range
* finalizer sees it as "in use" and blocks final delete
* service allocator can't allocate IPs from it
* apiserver can't recreate "default" because it has not actually been finalized.
* user can't make a "new-default" with the same range (unless we allow overlaps, one more reason)
* if we do allow overlaps as I suggest above, then "default" can be finalized because new-default covers the IPs

This is ugly any way you slice it.

How about something like:

on startup and periodically api server does:
* select all ranges with label "kubernetes.io/from-flags: true"
* look for at least one that is not being deleted (check values as described elsewhere?  maybe..)
* if it can't find one, creates a range named `default-<random>` (using `generateName`) with label "kubernetes.io/from-flags: true"
* if it finds more than one, log and ignore?

This ensures that, even if a user deletes the default, we will eventually recreate it (with a different name).

Something like this?

Author: yeah, that is true, but we have a controller that participates on deletion, is not legit if this controller is the one that detects that is the default range and recreates it?
In the case the controller is not running for reasons, each apiserver on bootstrap will always create the default IPRange if doesn't exist ... first win though, we want consistency on this default range accross the cluster, right?

Reviewer: > this controller is the one that detects that is the default range and recreates it?

You can't recreate it until it is finalized and it can't be finalized until all IPs are released.

* apiserver creates default range for 10.0.0.0/24
* kubernetes.default gets 10.0.0.1
* user deletes the default range (bad user!)
* finalizer sees it as "in use" and blocks final deletion (object remains)
* there is no way to cancel a deletion, so it stays being-deleted
* because it is being-deleted, the service allocator can't allocate new IPs from it
* apiserver can't recreate "default" because it has not actually been finalized
* ==> deadlock

The only way I see to recover from that (assuming no overlap) is to delete ALL the services, let the finalizer finish, then recreate it.

If we allow overlap and we assume the default range is not a single special name but a selector, then we can make a new default at any time.

Author: > If we allow overlap and we assume the default range is not a single special name but a selector, then we can make a new default at any time.

I like it, but what if we follow the example you linked with the storage class and use an annotation to define the default?

```
serviceiprange.kubernetes.io/is-default-class: true
```

if we allow overlapping we can recreate the range and we no longer depend on names.

Reviewer: "default" here means something different than storage class.  It doesn't mean "use this one if nothing is specified".  It means "this one comes from flags".

I thought label so it could be selected - e.g. there's a simple controller which does:

```
watch service IP ranges where "kubernetes.io/from-flags" = "true"
filter out "being deleted" ranges
for each event {
    if there are 0 non-deleting ranges {
        make a range named default-<random> from my own Service CIDR flags
        continue
    }
    if there is a range which exactly matches my own Service CIDR flags {
        continue
    }
    log "weird, there's a default range but it isn't the range I know"
    make a range named default-<random> from my own Service CIDR flags
}
```

Author: yeah, label is the right one

>  It means "this one comes from flags".

and "the kubernetes.default Service has an IP here" :see_no_evil:

#### IPAddress

The ServiceIPRange will act as a generator of IPAddresses, that will be defined as:

```go
// IPAddress represents an IP used by Kubernetes associated to an ServiceIPRange.
// The name of the object is the IP address in canonical format.
type IPAddress struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec   IPAddressSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
	Status IPAddressStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressSpec describe the attributes in an IP Address,
type IPAddressSpec struct {
	// ServiceIPRangeRef is a reference to the ServiceIPRange referenced
  // +required

> 	ServiceIPRangeRef *ServiceIPRangeReference

Author: yeah, maybe being paranoid, do we need to enforce this relation in the API? do you see any risk on not having this?

> 	ServiceIPRangeRef *ServiceIPRangeReference

Reviewer: There's no integrity that the API server will enforce for us automatically, so this is purely information for consumers, and not super useful info (especially if we allow overlaps)

}

// ServiceIPRangeReference represents an ServiceIPRange reference
type ServiceIPRangeReference struct {
	// Name is unique to reference an ServiceIPRange resource.
	Name string
}
```

The IPAddress will have the following operations:

- Create: 
   - validate the name is an IP address in its canonical format
   - add an annotation with the timestamp it was created, this is required because the IPAddress is
   allocated before the Service is created and, if the apiserver crash during the operation, the
   IPaddress will be orphan, but the controller doesn't have a way to know if it is really orphan or
   just being part of a new Service created.

>    - add a finalizer

Author: the IPAddress is created before the Service has been created, do we have this information at this point?
 is this part of the Service logic or the IPAddress logic?

>    - add a finalizer

Reviewer: If we don't set ownerRef, what will delete the IP when the service dies?

I am 90% sure you can set ownerRef before the owner exists and it is OK.

>    - add a finalizer

Author: the allocation happens in `BeginCreate`, and the object fields are populated at `BeforeCreate`, that happens after allocation.

I've double checked it, and the service object doesn't have the fields to set the ownerReference during allocation

```diff
diff --git a/pkg/registry/core/service/storage/alloc.go b/pkg/registry/core/service/storage/alloc.go
index 6a354d92a02..ecde61f2b3d 100644
--- a/pkg/registry/core/service/storage/alloc.go
+++ b/pkg/registry/core/service/storage/alloc.go
@@ -62,6 +62,7 @@ func (al *Allocators) allocateCreate(service *api.Service, dryRun bool) (transac
        result := metaTransaction{}
        success := false
 
+       klog.Infof("DEBUG allocate create %+v", service)
        defer func() {
                if !success {
                        result.Revert()
```

```
I0613 12:30:56.139016  257212 alloc.go:65] DEBUG allocate create &{TypeMeta:{Kind: APIVersion:} ObjectMeta:{Name:test-123 GenerateName: Namespace:test-external-name-drops-internal-traffic-policy SelfLink: UID: ResourceVersion: Generation:0 CreationTimestamp:0001-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 UTC DeletionTimestamp:<nil> DeletionGracePeriodSeconds:<nil> Labels:map[] Annotations:map[] OwnerReferences:[] Finalizers:[] ManagedFields:[{Manager:service.test Operation:Update APIVersion:v1 Time:2022-06-13 10:30:56.138954458 +0000 UTC FieldsType:FieldsV1 FieldsV1:{"f:spec":{"f:internalTrafficPolicy":{},"f:ports":{".":{},"k:{\"port\":80,\"protocol\":\"TCP\"}":{".":{},"f:port":{},"f:protocol":{},"f:targetPort":{}}},"f:selector":{},"f:sessionAffinity":{},"f:type":{}}} Subresource:}]} Spec:{Type:ClusterIP Ports:[{Name: Protocol:TCP AppProtocol:<nil> Port:80 TargetPort:{Type:0 IntVal:80 StrVal:} NodePort:0}] Selector:map[foo:bar] ClusterIP: ClusterIPs:[] IPFamilies:[] IPFamilyPolicy:<nil> ExternalName: ExternalIPs:[] LoadBalancerIP:
```

Do we set the ownerReference on Service creation? that is 2 API IPAdress calls inside one Service API call,  I was thinking that the controller will do the matching, it already has to deal with races on force deletion too

>    - add a finalizer

Reviewer: you pointed out elsewhere that ownerRef requires the owner be in the same scope (same NS or both not NS'ed), so this is all moot.  We have to do the cascade delet ourselves.

- Update: immutable

- Delete: an IP address controller will participate on the deletion removing the finalizer to avoid

>   that there are Services without an IP address object associated.

Author: I wasn't familiar with Gateway, ownerRef sounds good

The IPAddress object will be reconciled against the ServiceIPRanges and Services to guarantee that
all IPAddresses created belong to an existing ServiceIPRange and that they are owned by an existing Service.

The controller will avoid leaks cleaning all IPAddress without a Service owner reference or, if it doesn't has
an owner reference, the time since it was created (it has annotation with the timestamp creation) is greater

> than 15 seconds.

Author: 60s is the default request timeout in the apiserver, will use that

```

--request-timeout duration     Default: 1m0s
--
  | An optional field indicating the duration a handler must keep a request open before timing it out. This is the default request timeout for requests but may be overridden by flags such as --min-request-timeout for specific types of requests.

```

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial unit, integration and e2e tests completed and enabled
- Only basic functionality e2e tests implemented

#### Beta

- API stability, no disruptive changes on types and behaviors
- Gather feedback from developers and users
- Document and add advanced features testing: ServiceIP ranges renumbering, ...
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP
- Allowing time for feedback

#### GA

- 2 examples of real-world usage
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and GA/stable, because there's
no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports, in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include [conformance
tests].**

[conformance tests]:
    https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade / Version Skew Strategy

Reviewer: Also - will we keep the bitmap in sync when this is active?  I guess not, so let's say so,

  there are overlapping networks or the cluster run out of available IPs.
- the Service IP range is not exposed, so it is not possible for other components in the cluster to
  consume it
- the configuration is per node, there is no consensus and different apiservers can fight and delete
  others IPs.
- the allocation logic is racy, with the possibility of leaking ClusterIPs
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/87603
- the size of the Service Cluster CIDR, for IPv4 the prefix size is limited to /12, however, for
  IPv6 it is limited to /112 or fewer.This restriction is causing issues for IPv6 users, since /64
  is the standard and minimum recommended prefix length
- only is possible to use reserved a range of Service IP addresses using the feature gate
  "keps/sig-network/3070-reserved-service-ip-range"
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/95570

### Goals

Implement a new allocation logic for Services IPs that:

- scales well with the number of reservations
- the number of allocation is tunable
- is completely backwards compatible

### Non-Goals

- Any change unrelated to Services

> - Any generalization of the API model that can evolve onto something different, ike an IPAM API, or

Author: ```suggestion
- Any generalization of the API model that can evolve onto something different, like an IPAM API, or
```

  collide with existing APIs like Ingress and GatewayAPI.
- NodePorts use the same allocation model than ClusterIPs, but it is totally out of scope of this
  KEP. However, this KEP can be a proof that a similar model will work for NodePorts too.
- Change the default IPFamily used for Services IP allocation, the defaulting depends on the
  services.spec.IPFamily and services.spec.IPFamilyPolicy, a simple webhook or an admission plugin
  can set this fields to the desired default, so the allocation logic doesn't have to handle it.

## Proposal

The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that consumes 2 new API Objects: ServiceIPRange
and ServiceIP, and allow users to dynamically increase the number of Services IPs available by
creating new ServiceIPRanges.

The new allocator will be able to "automagically" consume IPs from any of this new ranges, we can
think about this model, as the same as adding more disks to a Storage system to increase the

> capacity.

Author: @thockin  ^^^

// xref: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties
type ServiceIPRangeStatus struct {
  // Conditions holds an array of metav1.Condition that describe the state of the ServiceIPRange.
  Conditions []metav1.Conditon
}

```

The ServiceIPRange will have the following operations:

- Create:
  
  - Validate fields
  - Set status to not ready, a controller should handle the status
  - Set a finalizer

- Update:

  - ServiceIPRangeSpec only will allow to a special operation to replace the "default" ServiceIPRange (see TBD)

- Delete:

  - The ServiceIPRange will have a finalizer to avoid leaking objects that depend on it.

The ServiceIPRange objects will be reconciled by a controller running in the kube-controller-manager
that will set the Status to ready so the new allocator can use it. It will perform the following
operations:

- cross validation, per example, avoiding overlapping IP Ranges
- participate on the deletion of a ServiceIPRange object, removing the finalizer, since a
  ServiceIPRange can only be removed if there are no IP Addresses referencing it

> - handle the operation of replacing the "default" ServiceIPRange (see TBD)
> 
> ##### Changing the default ServiceIPRange
> 
> There is an special situation that users may need to replace the Service IP range initially assigned to the cluster,
> it may overlap with others networks, per example.
> 
> The proposal is to have a documented process to be able to replace the default IPRange:
> 1. Users must free the default ServiceIPRange, moving all Services with IPs to a new ServiceIPRange
> 2. Once the ServiceIPRange is free, the default ServiceIPRange will support to change the configured IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.
> 
> Bear in mind that the apiservers flags with the service-cidrs must be updated, otherwise, during the
> next boot, they will notice that there is a new ServiceIPRange configured and use it, but they will
> start logging and generating events about the configuration mismatch.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The IPAddress object will be reconciled against the ServiceIPRanges and Services to guarantee that
all IPAddresses created belong to an existing ServiceIPRange and that they are owned by an existing Service.

The controller will avoid leaks cleaning all IPAddress without a Service owner reference or, if it doesn't has
an owner reference, the time since it was created (it has annotation with the timestamp creation) is greater
than 15 seconds.

### Allocator

A new allocator will be implemented that implements the current Allocator interface in the apiserver.

```go
// Interface manages the allocation of IP addresses out of a range. Interface
// should be threadsafe.
type Interface interface {
	Allocate(net.IP) error
	AllocateNext() (net.IP, error)
	Release(net.IP) error
	ForEach(func(net.IP))
	CIDR() net.IPNet
	IPFamily() api.IPFamily
	Has(ip net.IP) bool
	Destroy()
	EnableMetrics()

	// DryRun offers a way to try operations without persisting them.
	DryRun() Interface
}
```

This allocator will have an informer watching ServiceIPRanges and IPAddresses, so it can have locally the
information needed to assign new IP addresses to Services.

> The uniqueness of an IPAddress is guaranteed by the IPAddress object, since trying two allocate a new IP
> address already exist will fail.

Author: ```suggestion
The uniqueness of an IPAddress is guaranteed by the apiserver, since trying to allocate an IP
address that already exist will fail.
```
